Mindful writing, with Sara Epstein online at Temple Shir Tikvah

March 20, 2020

Bruce asked me about the book I'm reading. It seems his wife is
obsessed with Japanese literature. I don't know any Japanese
literature (except the first few pages of two novels that didn't
interest me), but I found this anthology in the used books section of
Brookline Booksmith. So now I'm trying to read the anthology real fast
so I can give it to Bruce's wife. The problem is, the storied don't
particularly interest me. Do you see a trend? But I shelled out seven
dollars for this book and I'm not giving it away until I finish it.

---

My congressional rep is in a fix. Actually, all 500 odd congressional
reps are in the same fix, along with thousands of other
politicians. They can't serve new terms until they win elections. But
they can't win elections without being on the ballot, and they can't
go on the ballot without hundreds of signatures on nominating
papers. You know how candidates get signatures on nominating
papers. Volunteers go door-to-door or downtown. But we can't do that
now. So my rep sent me nominating papers and asked me to sign them and
mail them back. The cost must be tremendous. And how does she know
whom to mail them to? You gotta be really connected to succeed with
this method. She knows I support her. So not only did Judy and I sign
them, I slipped them through my neighbors' mail slot and got their
signatures. Double mitzvah, double the political power.

---

Submerged sea creatures
Blooms, unblooms
Sticks
Multigreens
The nature show attract predictable artistic responses
If all the flowers in the room came alive, the scents would floor us
But there's little left in the Internet images
You want those feature-tickle brushstrokes, the shadows under shadows murmuring from the corners of the canvas
Alas, the show was on vies only four days
There was never an official opening
The building suffered a deep cleansing at that hour instead
Who will ever see this art, this nature?
Each artist will flaunt her own piece
But there's an art lacking
It was the art of all of the pieces together
And that condensed only for a brief flicker of a moment and dispersed again
I wish I could close my eyes and see it again
The memory persists, but the brushstrokes are cut away

------

March 27, 2020

I saw the two cacti on my south-facing window today, the stalks of the
succulents interweaving with the branches still bare on the bushes
outside. The succulents were left by my child and their partner when
we forced them out of the house two years ago. I don't fraternize
heavily with the plants my child left me. I practice social distancing
with them except once a week, when I give them water and prune the
brown detritus left by my inadequate watering of the previous
week. But now, having just read an article in WIRED Magazine about how
plants can save us from climate disruption, i appreciate the oxygen
quietly wafting from my succulents into the room. A lot of us will
need a lot of oxygen over the coming months. I am happy my child left
me my own supply.

---

It was living high off the hog. I got to work from home. I had long
stretches of nothing to do, but raked in the salary of a senior editor
even though I had transitioned out of those responsibilities years
before. When my managers presented me with a writing project, I could
always turn in a a draft faster and better than they had asked for,
and they expressed appreciation. Usually, these drafts would come out
on the web or in print with my name in bright white letters, flaunting
my powers to the community.

But after the layoff, I realized that even the most congenial,
well-worn path is still a rut. I was not too old to need new
challenges. Coasting, as I had been allowed to do, had reduced my
energy level, but after the layoff I have been sleeping less. I've
shed a few of my extra pounds. I get up each day thinking of things I
want to do that overflow the time I have: job applications, articles,
freelance work, poems, Jewish tests to study, political campaigns, and
of course all the bureaucracy that accompanies job endings. People
tell me to process my loss and grieve, but I'll have to wait for the
Sabbath to do that. Even then, we are not allowed to grieve on the
Sabbath.

---

Sure, it was hard telling my child and their partner that they had to
move out. Friends who had been through the same rupture--so many
families have had to do it--told us we needed to impose a limit. The
patner told me they rented a moving van because they were afraid I
would just thrust their possessions out on the street. Well, that
shows how necessary the threat was (even if imagined). But after a
couple weeks, the separation restored our relationship. Since then, it
has ranged (and even alternated) between the two of them blocking
texts and email from us to having my child accompany us each week to
religious services. And we never know what will come, or whether this
chaos will end.

------

Apr 3, 2020

It's a good thing I went out to mail letters today. I wanted to get to
the mailbox, despite heavy rain, to send 40 postcards to voters in
Georgia to make sure they are registered. I also sent letters to my
state legislators to complain about the state's failure to provide
unemployment benefits. On the porch I noticed a wet spot, and waited
till I saw the drip that had created it. Later, Judy and I checked,
and found wetter spots. Three drips.

This was almost a welcome intrusion into our space by nature. Our
house feels so sealed up. We do not want the outside air. Along with
the late winter chill, it brings viruses. We are sealed in. We
rebreathe our own breath, leavened only by the a bit of fresh oxygen
from our houseplants.

All the books and magazines I consult lie before me. I made a pile
last night to clear space for dinner. ike our sealed house, a single
ungainly pile provides me with my monthly WIRED magazine, my Medicare
guide, my Hebrew textbooks, and anything else I come across.

---

Ungainly: who cleans their house any more? We pay our housekeeper to
stay home and stay alive.I am supporting members of my own family, and
supporting hers. The house grows hoary with our scattered possessions.
My hair is a shaggy mat. Projects I desperately took on to fill the
emplty days are spreading like a pool of molasses. Where do I put all
the leftovers we cooked?

When I no longer can find things, I'll know it's time to clean.

---

I owe visits to several relatives. One visit would be simple. We even
started to plan the trip. We have a niece with a five-year-old we
don't know well and an infant. They're in Southern California, and it
would be great to visit Joshua Tree National Park while hanging out
with them. Another trip could be Philadelphia, where I have cousins
whom I treasure but don't get to see much. They used not to show
effort to get together, but appreciate me more in recent years.

Other trips are more fraught with both logistical and emotional
difficulties. One of my brothers is in Thailand. I love him and
respect him, but his personal style starts to grate after a couple
days--so how to shape a trip to Southest Asia around him while
limiting our time together? My other borther presents perplexing
barriers too. He is friendly and supportive, but prefers to see me
only for one short dinner in a restaurant per visit. I have a couple
other acquaintances I enjoy seeing in that part of Northern
California, but it would be an expensive visit for just a few meetings
the each take up a couple hours.

My intuition tells me that I will make all these visits. The pull of
family is a deep current in the ocean of fellowship. The richness of
the interactions will expand these short visits beyond the boundaries
of their duration.

------

Leslie Lawrence's "I am from" writing exercise

Idea from NPR Morning Edition

April 5, 2020

I am from dogwood, mowing lawns, charcoal grills

I am from the reel-to-reel tape deck on which my brothers and I recorded all the brashest music of the 1960s

I am from civil rightrs protesters, peace marchers who stayed in our home

I am from joke books, vocabulary-building books, Mad

From the sand lot where we played softball and the street not too busy
for a child to cross to get to the sand lot

I am from Lawry's Seasoned Salt, which could added to any dish. Its chemicals are probably still lodged in my fat

Speaking of fat

I am from Hostess cupcakes

I am from the blackboard built into the wall where we'd scribble for hours

From the piano four out of five family members played

From the local library. I was so excited to get to use the adult section years after I was ready for it

From the D Suzuki book that gave me a deep understanding of Buddhism, City Without Jews by Hugo Bettauer, the complete Ring cycle in the best renditions (somebody at the library must have understood music)

I am from the window poles we used in the sweltering Springs of Washington DC to let air into the classroom, the structured learning books in red and orange that taught me the New Math. I am probably the only student in that classroom to ever make practical use of the New Math

From vaporizers and Vicks VaporRub, bread with jam but no butter because my mother was convinced butter was bad for a cold. Why she thought I wanted the jam I don't know, because I never liked the jam, almost always grape, but I dutifully at it because...well, because I had a cold

From the bamboo forest on a hidden plot of land down a long driveway at the other end of my block

From science fiction books bearing the must of the basement where I always sat to read them

From Roadrunner cartoons that should by all assessments have turned me into mass murderer

So the path must have been uphill
