Installation

I. Arrival

Surely on other days the old church would be less gray, its stones
less rough and soggy, the bulldozer harrows in the yard less full of
mud. Umbrella in his left hand and satchel in his, Balsam gazed around
the church and at the gritty neighborhood that surrounded him. He
scanned the facade's details, copied from some Anglo-Saxen model, and
the date 1878 on the lintel. Then the door opened by the hand of a
young man in a jacket and tie.

"Ah, Henry Balsam," said the man warmly. "Welcome to your
congregation.  I'm deacon DEACON." Wan and thin, his face was as
entirely smooth, his light brown skin stretched across it a if on a
loom.  They shook hands, muttered preliminary words of
acquaintanceship, and headed down a hall whose edges were traced in
dust--evidence of ongoing renovations.

DEACON opened a wooden door leading to an odd-shaped nook, twice as
wide as it was deep. "I apologize for the makeshift office," he
said. "The renovation turned the old pastor's office into a playroom
for the children."

"I'm not fussy about space," Balsam reassured him.

"The chair of the board can't be here till tomorrow, unfortunately,"
DEACON said. "She's quite busy--head of a social work division. But
she'll text us before she drops by, and there's a trustee meeting on
Thursday evening where you can meet everyone. The installation will be
at the Sunday service, of course."

"I'm new at this work, as you know," answered Balsam. "How do you
suggest I get to learn about the church and its needs? Are there historical
and financial books I could peruse?"

"Certainly--I have a pile already assembled in the library, along with
more files of the sort we emailed you last week."

And before letting Balsam settle in the squeezed gap between the desk
and the wall, DEACON gave him a ring of keys, quickly explaining the
purpose of each, and invited him to stay for the daily soup kitchen at
5:00.

Balsam drummed his fingers on the oak desk top. During his final days
at campus and his train trip, he had maintained a staunch
practicality, knowing that he was a mere student being brought into a
pastorage for which he wasn't prepared, but promising to leap into the
role with professionalism. But the past few weeks had been wrenching,
and he could forgive himself for a few moments of dawdling.

Eventually he set himself to reading the documents DEACON had left
him, and just when his mind started to focus, a knock came to the
door.

"Excuse me, reverend," said DEACON. "Could you take a few minutes to
meet with one of our congregants?"

DEACON was replaced by a middle-aged woman with a powerful jaw and
fierce eyes, INHERITOR being her name. Behind her smile seemed to lay
a legacy. She took Balsam's right hand firmly and sat in the armchair
that barely fit next to his desk.

They made their introductions, and INHERITOR waxed eloquently about
the fine status of the city where Balsam was making his new home.

"I'm a docent in four different institutions of the city," INHERITOR
said, "for my family has been responsible for many of the great
buildings, including a museum and business school."

Balsam had already judged from INHERITOR's jeweled pendant and
clothing of gray restraint that she could speak for considerable
money. He allowed her to explain her father's good works in the city.

"His endowment renovated the central library, and we were explicitly
asked whether we wanted his name on it. We refused, because our
mission is the betterment of our community, not vulgar
self-advertisement. The building is called simply Central Circle
Library, to this day."

Without vulgar self-advertisement, INHERITOR allowed it to come out
during the conversation that her parents had been equally generous to
the church. "And that's why I dropped by to ask for my father to be
recognized with burial in the courtyard."

When Balsam gave a blank look, INHERITOR clearly showed some
agitation. So he had not been told that the current renovation had
removed obstacles from the courtyard, opening enough space for a
burial. That Eventide Church had decided to honor one of their leading
members with burial in this prominent spot. And that the pastor was to
choose the person thus honored.

"I am aware of the tradition of burial next to a church, of course,"
said Balsam. "But no one mentioned this as one of my
responsibilities."

INHERITOR waved a casual hand. "Of course we have many more pressing
tasks at Eventide, reverend. We minister to our members and to the
local residents. You'll have much to think about, obviously. So it
would be useful to take care of this burial issue and get it over
with."

"I find it an unusual responsibility, particularly for a person brand
new to the  job. I will talk to the deacon and the board and get back
to you as fast as I can. IS that acceptable?"

"Let me offer some counsel on that, reverend. You must talk to them,
of course, but you'll find that they went through the issue a good
nine months ago, when it was realized that the renovation was opening
up the space for a grave site, and they decided the choice was the
pastor's responsibility. So you'll just be unsealing old decisions
they probably don't want to revisit."

"And the pastor who was here before me didn't make the decision?"

"Unfortunately, no, Reverend George did not resolve it before
leaving. His departure was sudden."

"Thanks, INHERITOR. I'll certainly try to act on this issue in a timely
manner."

Balsam did not let himself consider the burial question any more that
afternoon, but delved instead into his stack of documents. He also had
access to several years' worth of financial records, and despite his
limited exposure to organizational budgeting as a former divinity
student, he forced himself to scan them. As might be expected, the
renovation of the historic building had called for more money than
expected, so although the congregation was in pretty good financial
shape, their recent expenditures had stressed their funds, the
beneficence of the INHERITOR familiy notwithstanding.

Escaping from his stifling office for a brief lunch alone in the
kitchen, he took a tour of the church. His keys let him into every
room, where he imagined he might learn more about the congregation
than he could from spreadsheets and formal records. The children's
play room didn't strike him as well chosen. The windows were too high
for a young child to look out, and the tables were constrained by the
shae of the room. Overall, the change of office left both the
children's room and his paltry chamber unsatisfactory--nothing like
the lavish update to the sanctuary. The renovation had scrupulously
restored both the original design and the original materials, which
had by no means been modest in their own day. Balsam speculated that,
if Mr. INHERITOR could see the good use to which his legacy had been
put in the restoration, he might not feel the need for his body to be
dragged back and interred next to it.

The soup kitchen was cheerful and the diners well-manners, although
they didn't relax their scowls or share a word with each other. He had
worked in many a soup kitchen and found this to be one with all the
rest. The volunteers greeted him enthusiastically.

But on the way back to his apartment for a meager cheese sandwich and
an apple, Balsam viewed the brick and clapboard around him
differently. Now he rated each open spot or stairwell as a
restingplace, guessing that many of them played that role each night.

II. Confession

The rain had lifted the next day, and Balsam saw Eventide Church in a
kinder light. The ruts in the courtyard reminded him of INHERITOR's
request, so he asked DEACON how the issue had arisen.

"I apologize, Reverend," said DEACON. "In the rush to interview and
hire you, nobody had a moment to explain this matter about a grave
site. There are actually three leading members of the church who want
a relative buried there, and with room for only one, a certain amount
of polite maneuvering has been going on during the past six months."

"It seems that the board didn't want to be saddled with the decision."

"They hoped that the old pastor, who had been here twenty-six years,
could handle it, but after he left, they relegated it to you."

"Me alone?," asked Balsam, feeling more and more exposed.

"Indeed, it's a small task but a thorny one," DEACON agreed. All three
are part of multi-generational member families, and are generous in
their support. In fact, one is coming to see you today. Did you check
you calendar? He is taking you out to lunch."

Greg Heftmauer turned out to be a slightly stocky, energetic young man
in a fine suit, his wispy blond hair just a bit longer than is
standard. The restaurant to which he took Balsam was elegant, with
green tableclothes and exposed wood beams, but Heftmauer treated their
visit as casually as if he was munching on a pizza at the corner shop.
They talked about Balsam's student past and Heftmauer congratulated
him on getting a fine placement. "Our church has occupied an honored
place for over a century," he said. "I intend to help you take it to
new heights.

Heftmauer explained, "The need in the community is greater than ever,
and a soup kitchen is only a small easing of people's pain. We're
participating in some housing and job training efforts in the city,
but I'd love to see a bold initiative. My family is so lucky to be
supporting much of the city. Like many places, our factories have been
reduced, but we still provide employment to a considerable percentage
of the population. And a set of attached clinics started by my uncles
are thriving."

After they talked about some of the community efforts, Heftmauer
bantered about his brother, sisters, uncles--various branches of the
family who had been central to Eventide Church. Balsam knew how the
conversation would turn. Which of the deceased had Heftmauer chosen
for the coveted spot in the courtyard?

"And they all go back to grandfather Lars," said Heftmauer. "He
was a lion of the community, and he's the main person I want to tell
you about today. Lars Heftmauer

---

Having a whole evening without obligations, at first he strolled with
little sense of impulse. He walked over to the main thoroughfare with
its restaurants. And after all, why not buy a nice sandwich at the
gourmet shop? He was alone in the city with nothing but the stiff,
small corridor and grayed walls of an apartment. The sardines and
white bread of an economy he knew as a student. He was earning money
now.

As night was falling upon his exit from the gourmet shop, he started
to walk with more purpose toward his apartment. But suddenly he saw a
smartly dressed young woman fall into the well of an apartment
building.

"Ma'am? Are you all right?" He bent down to help her before noticing
that she not truly fallen but slid into a homeless person's nest of
pads and pillows.

"Doing fine, thank you, Reverend," said the woman.

"I beg your pardon for disturbing you. Do you need a meal? I have a
mortadella and provolone sandwich."

"No need, Reverend. I get all the fine things--it's just housing
that's a problem. I'm heading out soon for work."

"Let me introduce myself: Henry Balsam of Eventide Church. Your name?"

"Holly. I obviously can't make an appearance to the good folks at
Eventide, but I sure do appreciate your concern."

"I am concerned, Holly, yes--I'm guessing you put yourself at risk to
support yourself."

"I know that very well, Reverend Balsam. But I think of it like this:
the people I work for appreciate my existence. I haven't always known
that blessing, Reverent. You may not need to work hard for people to
accept you as a person, but some of us do, we do.

Balsam looked at the resident of the well. She had a wide but
attractive nose flanked by flat cheeks whose make-up lightened their
dusty color. There was a knowing watchfulness in her eyes but no hint
of anger or resentment in her face. Tall and lithe, she stretched out
across her mattress with an out-of-place confidence and rested her
high heels on a step. When she lifted an arm and her sleeve slipped a
bit, needle marks could be glimpsed.

"Where are you parents, Holly?" asked Balsam gently.

He could see a contraction of the nostrils. "Back in Hagarsdale, I
expect. I grew up there, but I'm never going back."

"Did your parents do something to hurt you?"

"Nothing special. Nothing but slap my face when I showed up for dinner
one night with hoop earrings. Nothing but grab my hair and pull me to
the floor because I grew it too long for their taste."

"Ah," said Balsam. "I take it you were once a boy, Holly."

"Never. Never a boy." Holly started pleading. "Don't put that on me,
Reverend. Be my friend. OK? Be my helper, be my guide."

"It looks like I need you to guide me, Holly."

"Good then. I will clue you in, Reverend Balsam."

---

"You don't mind that I left after the way my parents treated me?"

"When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me
up."


---

Suddenly a fury coursed through him. He had been lured into a [] of
licentiousness. He was the cover-up for a crime no one would talk
about, a crime so horrible that the goodly church folk couldn't even
let themselves gaze into Pastor George's old office. By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners.

---

A bustle around the food table contrasted with the meek orderliness of
the indigent people at the free evening meals, leading Bolsom to
speculate who needed the ministrations of Eventide more.

---

REVEREND Henry Balsam

Relatively young, surveys the field before he speaks, sensative, alert to motivations and agendas, conventional but open to education, congenitally skeptical

Deacon

Discreet, concerned with institutional success, supportive but with an agenda, keeps secrets

UPSTART Greg Heftmauer

Angry that his grandfather did not achieve the success his family later achieved, consumed with getting his grandfather and therefore the whole family the recognition he thinks they deserve thanks to their current success, believes that the poor should be entrepreneurial like his family

INHERITOR

Simply a representative of the ruling class, proud of all her father's buldings and monetary contributions to the city, wants to be rich in a responsible way, taking care of the downtrodden but upholding the status quo

LEADER

Has her fingers in everything, on every committee in the church and outside, also considers her mother's contributions of a more social sort to be paramount to the health of the city

URCHIN Holly

Transgender prostitute, homeless, mixed-race, never understood by either parent, rejected, needs to self-medicate, heroin addict, but sensitive and accepts his place as the only possibility, wants to help others meet their sexual needs.

FIANCEE

Not committed to her lover, thinks he will not succeed as a pastor, skeptical like him but in a way that rejecs his ideals, can't share his life.

---

Scenes

Arrival

Meeting with first petitioner

Request for information with deacon

Arrival of homeless for meal

Next day: Meeting with second petitioner

First meeting with Holly

Next day: Meeting with third petitioner

Meeting with chair of the board

Second meeting with a petitioner: tour of ity

Next day: second meeting with a petitioner

Board meeting

Second meeting with Holly. Memory of girlfriend.

Sunday installation

Next day: second meeting with a petitioner

Third meeting with Holly

Next day: second meeting with a petitioner

More church logistics

Search for Holly and conversation with policeman, denouement

Holly is always sitting on a filthy sleeping bag, gray flecked with
brown

Reverend's dream: He slept deep and hard. He dreamed that he saw an
army of angels advancing, their robes gray flecked with brown. He
wanted to ask their help but could not speak, even though it was his
responsibility to deliver the sermon.

---

"I could have made out good with that solvent," Holly muttered. "Not
about the money, you never know about the money because the big
company will screw you out of it every time. But I could have gotten
noticed for my skill, a scholarship, maybe."

Balsam felt nothing but sadness and had no words to offer.

---

"What happened with the solvent, Holly?" asked Balsam. "Did it win?"

"I was sure it would. I lined it up next to the grubby science
projects of the other students. But the science teacher disqualified
me right away. Said it was an engineering project, not a science
project. Didn't belong in the show."

Balsam boiled, but held himself back and asked, "How did you feel
after that"?

"Like shit, natch. The school wouldn't send a letter to MANUFACTURER
either. The whole idea was thrown in the trash. I had just a month
left in the school year, and I got out of that shit school and that
shit town after that."

They both fell silent while Balsam tried to revise his understanding
of Holly, who then started up again as if making a confession. "What I
really wanted from that contest was to make my father notice
me. Care. Consider like I was cool with my studies.

"He never really noticed my experiment. It went unrecognized by the
high school, so it didn't exist for my parents. And they were rankling
more and more over my hair and the girly clothes I was wearing. I
don't expect they looked for me after I skipped town.

---

When he finally called the morgue, the manager invited him down right
away. Leaving voice mail for DEACON, Balsam walked the two miles to
the morgue and was invited into the examination room. Holly's face was
smashed in, but her forehead, with its olive skin and lithe frame,
remained recognizable.

"We found him just off the waterfront." The manager looked as gray as
a corpse himself, with hard eyes but a tiredness around the mouth.
"The coroner figures that at least three perpetrators were in on the
attack, but we have no leads."

"No idea about the motive?" asked Balsam.

"Could be so many things. The victim was clearly an abuser, so the
fight could have been over a drug payment. Or a sex act. A turf
violation. Plus plenty of kids are out there just letting out their
feelings about transies."

"Can you try to find his parents? He, she, told me she was from
Hagarsdale."

"This is the kid who called themselves Holly, right? Do you know the
original name, the last name?"

"No."

"The name of the town's a good lead. But I'll let you know right now,
when police reach the parents of these kids, they often don't want to
take the body."

"So then it will be a cremation and pauper's grave for Holly?"

"That's the norm."

Balsam walked back slowly from the place where an unrecognized passing
was norm. He made it down a block, across a street. And suddenly lying
against the bricks of an auto body shop, panting uncontrollably. It
was if he had to thrust from himself the knowledge of this poor
transient that he had imbibed on those street night talks. The promise
shown by the abandoned child. The kindness Holly had shown Balsam
talking about his own life.

He slunk into his cramped chair at Eventide Church and put his head on
the worn desk. Of course he had dealt with the deaths of others in his
training, but nothing seemed to  make sense in Holly's case.

DEACON knocked gently. "Reverend, we have a group here to meet with
you. The petitioners about the grave. Please come."

Heftmauer, INHERITOR, and LEADER were sitting in the board room.  With
DEACON behind him, Balsam felt compassed about with witnesses.

"Reverend," announced INHERITOR, "we must insist that you decide who
is to be given the place of honor in the courtyard. The renovation
must stay on schedule."

"No one else can make the determination who is buried there," said
Heftmauer.

LEADER added, "We don't like putting pressure on you, but we are
agreed that the matter must come to a close."

Balsam wiped away his tears, looked at them, and said, "I have made my
choice."

---

Acts 18:9 Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: 10 For I am with thee,

Romans 1:12  I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.

Romans 2:15 show the work of the law written in their hearts

Romans 2:21 Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?

Romans 3:8 Let us do evil, that good may come?

Romans 3:19 that every mouth may be stopped

Romans 3:27 Where is boasting then?

Romans 5:3 we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; 4 And patience, experience; and experience, hope: 5 And hope maketh not ashamed;

Romans 5:19 by one man's disobedience many were made sinners

Romans 6:7 he that is dead is freed from sin.

I Corinthians 1:10 Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.

I Corinthians 1:20 hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

I Corinthians 9:24 Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize?

I Corinthians 14:9 ye shall speak into the air.

Galatians 3:27 There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

I Thessalonians 5:19 Quench not the Spirit.

II Timothy 6:10 For the love of money is the root of all evil

Hebrews 3:3 he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house. 4 For every house is builded by some man; but he that built all things is God.

Hebrews 12:1 compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses

James 1: 26 If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

James 4: 14 Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow.

