Title: Installation at Eventide

CHURCH Eventide Church
Holly's home town: Hagarsdale

REVEREND Henry Balsam

Relatively young, surveys the field before he speaks, sensative, alert to motivations and agendas, conventional but open to education, congenitally skeptical

Deacon

Discreet, concerned with institutional success, supportive but with an agenda, keeps secrets

UPSTART

Angry that his grandfather did not achieve the success his family later achieved, consumed with getting his grandfather and therefore the whole family the recognition he thinks they deserve thanks to their current success, believes that the poor should be entrepreneurial like his family

INHERITOR

Simply a representative of the ruling class, proud of all her father's buldings and monetary contributions to the city, wants to be rich in a responsible way, taking care of the downtrodden but upholding the status quo

LEADER

Has her fingers in everything, on every committee in the church and outside, also considers her mother's contributions of a more social sort to be paramount to the health of the city

URCHIN Holly

Transgender prostitute, homeless, mixed-race, never understood by either parent, rejected, needs to self-medicate, heroin addict, but sensitive and accepts his place as the only possibility, wants to help others meet their sexual needs.

FIANCEE

Not committed to her lover, thinks he will not succeed as a pastor, skeptical like him but in a way that rejecs his ideals, can't share his life.

---

Scenes

Day 1:

Meeting with first petitioner

Request for information with deacon

Meeting with chair of the board

Arrival of homeless for meal

First meeting with Holly

Day 2:

Meeting with second petitioner

Board meeting

Day 3:

Next day: Meeting with third petitioner

Second meeting with Holly. Memory of girlfriend.

Second meeting with second petitioner: tour of city

Day 4:

Sunday installation

Second meeting with first petitioner

Third meeting with Holly. Talk of scientific prowess.

Day 5:

Next day: second meeting with third petitioner

Told that construction is being held up

Fourth meeting with Holly, who gives advice

Day 6:

Search for Holly and conversation with policeman, denouement

---

Swedenborg for spirituality

---

Acts 18:9 Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: 10 For I am with thee,

Romans 1:12  I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.

Romans 2:15 show the work of the law written in their hearts

Romans 2:21 Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?

Romans 3:8 Let us do evil, that good may come?

Romans 3:19 that every mouth may be stopped

Romans 3:27 Where is boasting then?

Romans 5:3 we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; 4 And patience, experience; and experience, hope: 5 And hope maketh not ashamed;

Romans 5:19 by one man's disobedience many were made sinners

Romans 6:7 he that is dead is freed from sin.

I Corinthians 1:10 Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.

I Corinthians 1:20 hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

I Corinthians 9:24 Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize?

I Corinthians 14:9 ye shall speak into the air.

Galatians 3:27 There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

I Thessalonians 5:19 Quench not the Spirit.

II Timothy 6:10 For the love of money is the root of all evil

Hebrews 3:3 he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house. 4 For every house is builded by some man; but he that built all things is God.

Hebrews 12:1 compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses

James 1: 26 If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

James 4: 14 Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow.
