A Throng on Thursday

“The Transported One was laid off yesterday,” Ursula said, and while
she frowned with appropriate funerality, gratification flared in her
nostrils.

“Will the costs of her consulting be repurposed toward the remaining
staff?” I responded. “Then there truly could be justice in the
universe.”

"You're asking me to tell you the outcome of a lottery," she said
dryly. "The results are announced on July 1 of each year."

By this time we were seated, having arrived before the crowd. She had
shaken out her headscarf and thrown it over her chair. Her hands
rested on the tablecloth, while my right hand gently tapped my
fork. Remembering how she never toyed with her silverware, I stopped
my drumbeat and returned to the tragedy of overbearing consultant who
had been dubbed the Transported One by Ursula's coworkers.

"Even before Transportation releases its budget," I said, "Felipe will
tell you what resources you have to deal with."

"I never make risky predictions," Ursula insisted. "Tight budgeting is
still this Administration's hallmark, and the department is engrossed
with a couple bridges they'd like to keep from falling down in the
western part of the state. In fact, predictions were part of Cindy's
failure," she went on, using the real name of the Transported
One. "She was always too sure her toll enhancement plan would be
approved, and underestimated its effects on neighboring roads."

The waiter came for drinks, and Ursula ordered a Cabernet while I
requested a dry Manhattan with Bulleit rye straight up.

"And how are your projects?" she asked.

"Unsatisfactory," I quietly responded. "Maybe it's a bad year for
consultants."

"It's a bad economy. You are not an unrestrained profligate like the
Transported One."

Rubbing one of my hands with the other, I told her a bit about
clients, about deals that fell through, funding withdrawn, and all the
usual hazards of consulting. I did not want to belabor my woes, even
though they took up a good deal of my time and had an insidious way of
invading my idle moments. I tried to maintain a detachment from the
external pressures that work as an organizational consultant brought,
trying to relegate them to transience.

The waiter interrupted us momentarily to tell me that the liquors I
wanted weren't available, so I said the bartender could make the
choice and continued to Ursula, "You took the safe path when the
Bureau of Regional Integration closed, and landed on your feet. I
figured I could get by on my own, and the jury is still out on that."

"I'm willing to check openings for you in the agencies I deal with."

"Perfect, I really appreciate that," I said. "In the long run, though,
I need to wrench myself out of my rut. I would like to go back for
another master's, maybe in public health. My problem is that I can
support myself through school for two or three years, but I can't sock
money away for Kathie's college education while doing it. I'd have to
get the court to OK the hiatus, which they would do, but it's just not
responsible behavior."

"Have you talked to Sharon about it?"

"No. I don't want to open the can of worms until fish come into
view. And I have personal reasons for keeping these calculations
secret." I was dead set against revealing financial weakness to
Sharon. She was always fair to me, but I feared that in some
unconscious way she would use any failure of mine to further justify
our divorce—to communicate to Kathie that somehow I wasn't such a good
Dad. My connection to Kathie seemed to be attenuated already, and I
was terrified of the direction it might go in.

Ursula straighted and up her eyes opened round, as they always did
when she trying to be helpful. "You should find a large firm that can
pay for your degree while you're working there."

"Ideal, yes. But improbable in this business climate. Like you, I have
been privileged to see the budgets of the companies I work for." I
could see the waiter bringing our drinks, weaving left and right with
the finesse of a skier as he made his way through the growing throng
of patrons. Ursula and I paused, let him serve, and clinked
glasses. The Manhattan was too sweet, as I had feared. Now the waiter
was by the side of the table again with his tablet and pencil, so
Ursula ordered the steamed monkfish and I asked for an asparagus
risotto.

Ursula laced her hands under her sharp chin, a break from her normal
repose that signaled a turn. "We're signing Ann up for math tutoring
over the summer," she said. "She's entering high school, and there is
no way I'm going to let a daughter of mine stumble through school weak
in the sciences."

"I'll back you up on that, but what's her opinion?"

"She always knew we take education seriously in all subjects. So I
can't say she's jumping at the opportunity to brush up on geometry and
algebra, but she'll go along with the plan."

"Maybe you can find a program that will inspire her." I rambled on a
bit about how young people aren't like adults, and need motivation to
apply themselves.

"Well, over the years, of course, you've heard from me about Ann's
creative interests," she replied. "We were looking for an innovative
program to tie math and science to the arts, and that's what led us to
Dry Creek. In fact, she's in a dance performance two nights from
now. Stef has been picking her up from school after her rehearsals."

"That's a pretty long drive for him."

"Yes, and I've been looking for a new house. The trade-off is space
versus proximity to the school."

"Are you unsatisfied with the amount of space you have now?" I
wondered what change had come into their lives to make them crave a
bigger house. Ursula had never let fly a hint that she might want a
third child.

"Oh, it's just Stef's crankiness about room for computer equipment and
his workshop. We'd have to move further out to a place like Poramter
to satisfy him."

The meal came, and we took our first delicate tastes. "Well, what do
you think?" asked Ursula.

"The tartness of the asparagus is good, but the rice could have a
smoother texture."

"No, about the house. Do we go for size or location? Ann and Jeremy
are on my side," she added to bolster her case, her eyes narrowing as
she gazed at me. The color of her eye make-up was indeterminate under
the restaurant's dim light, but I had noticed in the atrium that she
had colored her lids a dramatic shade of blue. I was certain she
didn't wear that to the office. During our years in the bureau, she
had dressed quite primly.

"Get on a train line and let Ann commute to Dry Creek."

"Hmm, I'll think about that," Ursula said. I didn't actually believe
my suggestion was feasible, given the layout of the suburbs, but I
liked to be a peacemaker.

She tapped her knife on the plate for a minute. "The chef did
something intriguing with the sauce on this monkfish. But it's
overcooked."

"Better than underdone."

"I don't order it often because it's endangered, but tonight I had a
craving."

"Do you go out with Stef a lot?"

"I meet him in town sometimes after work, often with the kids. He's
usually busy on the weekends going over corporate charts or making his
little wood projects, and this way we squeeze in family time."

She stabbed her fish, and while taking some rice into my mouth I
raised my head for a moment. The restaurant had filled up, being a
popular place Thursday nights, and the heads of the patrons and wait
staff crisscrossed the wall sconces that illuminated the room, almost
creating a strobe effect. The noise level had also risen. A clatter of
silverware, glasses, and teeth merged with the amber atmosphere and
the effects of my Manhattan to form a general buzz.

"How often are you seeing Kathie?" she asked.

"Every other weekend. We don't have much in common these days, and I
try really hard to find positive experiences. She's gotten too old for
kid stuff, but she unfortunately doesn't like museums or other adult
activities we could share. I'll take her to a rock concert if it's not
too expensive, or watch TV together."

"You have to cope with the artificiality of such visits."

"Definitely. I keep in close touch with Sharon, and she admits that
Kathie has been withdrawing from her as well. Part of it is normal for
her age, but Sharon has the advantage of living with Kathie and
managing her life full-time. I feel like my daughter could mostly
ignore me for five years, go to college, relocate to another city, and
just go through life spending ten minutes on the phone with me once in
a while."

"A horrible fate."

"It seems all too realistic."

"You could talk to Kathie about it."

"I'm trying to find a way to do that."

She shook her head slightly. "Sometimes being direct is the best way."

"It depends on the situation." We fell silent for an uncomfortable
moment, and then I asked, "What do you and the kids do on weekends,
then?"

"Extracurricular projects. I don't push these on Ann and Jeremy—in
fact, I feel like I'm always discouraging them from taking on
more. The pressure just comes from all over. It's lucky they have so
much energy. They're always going full burn."

"It becomes always a management job for the parents."

"We use spreadsheets in our household. I'll tell you, it's gotten out
of hand. But if they're thriving, I'll play my part. When we move, it
will be a shame to lose the parent community I've entered into at
Jeremy's school."

"So things are still going well."

"Luckily." The noise had increased to the point where we brought our
faces closer together, conspiratorily. Ursula went on, "Stef is not
handling Jeremy well. He had the same trouble when Ann became a
teenager, but it improved as the got older."

"What does he do?"

"He just never got over his own adolescence. He has to be the rebel,
the one who doesn't respect rules. He outdoes his own children in
mischief. A forty-five year old man should not be putting plastic toys
out in suggestive poses in the park and then giggle about it."

"But is that so bad?"

"It's profoundly confusing for a child just entering a new era of
responsibility to witness it."

Suddenly the image of Melanie came into my mind. I still felt bad
about the two-month affair we had had, a year or so after Sharon and I
agreed to our break. I couldn't imagine that Ursula or anyone else in
the office knew about it, but it felt wrong in the same way that my
two escapades with other men in college felt. There is something
knocking at the door of one's consciousness about these things,
shouting that this is not you.

"Kathie is thirteen and has been having difficulty for several years,"
I said, "and the only way I would blame Sharon and me is for splitting
up. Before that, she was positively a bookworm. She got A's and went
through a whole shelf of young person's books at the library during
Christmas break and read two grade levels higher than her own. We
don't like the crowd she's hanging out with, and she's sloppy about
her studies. It seems like something snapped when I left the house."

"She didn't handle it well? You have to expect a child to act out
some."

"It was just a symptom of the wedge between us. We tried, Sharon and I
tried. We would sit with her together and explain that the break-up
had nothing to do with her and all the usual assurances. Of course, I
don't see what goes on when Sharon and Kathie are at home, and I give
Sharon full credit for dealing alone with a child at a difficult age,
but..."

I paused longer than I expected, and Ursula simply waited without
filling the gap in conversation untill I realized that I didn't know
what I meant to say next. I had never figured out how Sharon fell out
of love with me and I felt unfairly accused of something never uttered
explicitly. Kathie was just as perplexing. "I guess I can't repair my
relationship with Kathie," I finally said, "as long as my relationship
with Sharon is merely polite."

"And do you want it to be more than that?"

"No, to be honest. I know that Sharon doesn't. Not for a while."

Ursula's eyes lowered. "I'm sorry for you, Ben. This has gone on a
long time, and you're doing your best."

The waiter left a small black folder on the table. "I can pick this
up," Ursula said, but I blocked her hand.

"We've always split the check, and I'm not in dire straights," I
said. It occurred to me that letting Ursula pay might cause her to put
more months between our occasional dinners. But leaving aside the
practical concerns, I just felt that sharing the check equally was an
appropriate mark of our professional relationship. We got our coats
and went out into the misty night.

"This has been a very pleasant evening," Ursula said. "It has been a
long time that we've known each other."

"Incredible that we've kept it up," I said, "I appreciate your
listening tonight." Walking under the indecisive lighting of
streetlamps too fatigued to contend with the rain, we came to her car,
touched cheeks, and separated.

I had already spent more than I really should have for an evening out,
but I walked down Market Street and turned left on South, then on
Baker. I entered a small jazz club with a good bar and ordered another
Manhattan the way I wanted it. A piano trio was riffling
through a Wayne Shorter standard, and I thought with amusement of Ursula's
monkfish. Fingering my glass, I mulled the success of the
evening. Ursula had told me her frustrations and continued to show
faith in my ability to share important parts of her life. I had
managed to let down my own guard as well. Beyond the subjects of chat
was something inordinately gratifying about our exchange, and it
filled me with an rare calm. When I left the bar, the rain came down
harder. It was a few blocks to the commuter rail, and I had not
thought to bring an umbrella.

---

"My biggest contribution was to call Lynn Grazioso and ask her whether
her consituents would enjoy undergoing another water shortage like
2002." I beamed inwardly to think of this boldness. It was unheard of
and possible illegal, but after a month of sleeping four hours a night
I was not going to let the water plan slide away from us. "By the end
of our conversation she completely understood the importance of the
plan and what she needed to do to push it through her chamber."

---

"The governor was ready to let it drop. There's never room between tax
fights and abortion challenges for a long-term project. No staff
either."

"Although the situation was better than the current governor."
