Mindful writing, with Sara Epstein online at Temple Shir Tikvah

March 20, 2020

Bruce asked me about the book I'm reading. It seems his wife is
obsessed with Japanese literature. I don't know any Japanese
literature (except the first few pages of two novels that didn't
interest me), but I found this anthology in the used books section of
Brookline Booksmith. So now I'm trying to read the anthology real fast
so I can give it to Bruce's wife. The problem is, the storied don't
particularly interest me. Do you see a trend? But I shelled out seven
dollars for this book and I'm not giving it away until I finish it.

---

My congressional rep is in a fix. Actually, all 500 odd congressional
reps are in the same fix, along with thousands of other
politicians. They can't serve new terms until they win elections. But
they can't win elections without being on the ballot, and they can't
go on the ballot without hundreds of signatures on nominating
papers. You know how candidates get signatures on nominating
papers. Volunteers go door-to-door or downtown. But we can't do that
now. So my rep sent me nominating papers and asked me to sign them and
mail them back. The cost must be tremendous. And how does she know
whom to mail them to? You gotta be really connected to succeed with
this method. She knows I support her. So not only did Judy and I sign
them, I slipped them through my neighbors' mail slot and got their
signatures. Double mitzvah, double the political power.

---

Submerged sea creatures
Blooms, unblooms
Sticks
Multigreens
The nature show attract predictable artistic responses
If all the flowers in the room came alive, the scents would floor us
But there's little left in the Internet images
You want those feature-tickle brushstrokes, the shadows under shadows murmuring from the corners of the canvas
Alas, the show was on vies only four days
There was never an official opening
The building suffered a deep cleansing at that hour instead
Who will ever see this art, this nature?
Each artist will flaunt her own piece
But there's an art lacking
It was the art of all of the pieces together
And that condensed only for a brief flicker of a moment and dispersed again
I wish I could close my eyes and see it again
The memory persists, but the brushstrokes are cut away

------

March 27, 2020

I saw the two cacti on my south-facing window today, the stalks of the
succulents interweaving with the branches still bare on the bushes
outside. The succulents were left by my child and their partner when
we forced them out of the house two years ago. I don't fraternize
heavily with the plants my child left me. I practice social distancing
with them except once a week, when I give them water and prune the
brown detritus left by my inadequate watering of the previous
week. But now, having just read an article in WIRED Magazine about how
plants can save us from climate disruption, i appreciate the oxygen
quietly wafting from my succulents into the room. A lot of us will
need a lot of oxygen over the coming months. I am happy my child left
me my own supply.

---

It was living high off the hog. I got to work from home. I had long
stretches of nothing to do, but raked in the salary of a senior editor
even though I had transitioned out of those responsibilities years
before. When my managers presented me with a writing project, I could
always turn in a a draft faster and better than they had asked for,
and they expressed appreciation. Usually, these drafts would come out
on the web or in print with my name in bright white letters, flaunting
my powers to the community.

But after the layoff, I realized that even the most congenial,
well-worn path is still a rut. I was not too old to need new
challenges. Coasting, as I had been allowed to do, had reduced my
energy level, but after the layoff I have been sleeping less. I've
shed a few of my extra pounds. I get up each day thinking of things I
want to do that overflow the time I have: job applications, articles,
freelance work, poems, Jewish tests to study, political campaigns, and
of course all the bureaucracy that accompanies job endings. People
tell me to process my loss and grieve, but I'll have to wait for the
Sabbath to do that. Even then, we are not allowed to grieve on the
Sabbath.

---

Sure, it was hard telling my child and their partner that they had to
move out. Friends who had been through the same rupture--so many
families have had to do it--told us we needed to impose a limit. The
patner told me they rented a moving van because they were afraid I
would just thrust their possessions out on the street. Well, that
shows how necessary the threat was (even if imagined). But after a
couple weeks, the separation restored our relationship. Since then, it
has ranged (and even alternated) between the two of them blocking
texts and email from us to having my child accompany us each week to
religious services. And we never know what will come, or whether this
chaos will end.

------

April 3, 2020

It's a good thing I went out to mail letters today. I wanted to get to
the mailbox, despite heavy rain, to send 40 postcards to voters in
Georgia to make sure they are registered. I also sent letters to my
state legislators to complain about the state's failure to provide
unemployment benefits. On the porch I noticed a wet spot, and waited
till I saw the drip that had created it. Later, Judy and I checked,
and found wetter spots. Three drips.

This was almost a welcome intrusion into our space by nature. Our
house feels so sealed up. We do not want the outside air. Along with
the late winter chill, it brings viruses. We are sealed in. We
rebreathe our own breath, leavened only by the a bit of fresh oxygen
from our houseplants.

All the books and magazines I consult lie before me. I made a pile
last night to clear space for dinner. ike our sealed house, a single
ungainly pile provides me with my monthly WIRED magazine, my Medicare
guide, my Hebrew textbooks, and anything else I come across.

---

Ungainly: who cleans their house any more? We pay our housekeeper to
stay home and stay alive.I am supporting members of my own family, and
supporting hers. The house grows hoary with our scattered possessions.
My hair is a shaggy mat. Projects I desperately took on to fill the
emplty days are spreading like a pool of molasses. Where do I put all
the leftovers we cooked?

When I no longer can find things, I'll know it's time to clean.

---

I owe visits to several relatives. One visit would be simple. We even
started to plan the trip. We have a niece with a five-year-old we
don't know well and an infant. They're in Southern California, and it
would be great to visit Joshua Tree National Park while hanging out
with them. Another trip could be Philadelphia, where I have cousins
whom I treasure but don't get to see much. They used not to show
effort to get together, but appreciate me more in recent years.

Other trips are more fraught with both logistical and emotional
difficulties. One of my brothers is in Thailand. I love him and
respect him, but his personal style starts to grate after a couple
days--so how to shape a trip to Southest Asia around him while
limiting our time together? My other borther presents perplexing
barriers too. He is friendly and supportive, but prefers to see me
only for one short dinner in a restaurant per visit. I have a couple
other acquaintances I enjoy seeing in that part of Northern
California, but it would be an expensive visit for just a few meetings
the each take up a couple hours.

My intuition tells me that I will make all these visits. The pull of
family is a deep current in the ocean of fellowship. The richness of
the interactions will expand these short visits beyond the boundaries
of their duration.

------

Leslie Lawrence's "I am from" writing exercise

Idea from NPR Morning Edition

April 5, 2020

I am ffrom dogwoods, mowing lawns, charcoal grills

I am from the reel-to-reel tape deck on which my brothers and I recorded all the brashest music of the 1960s

I am from civil rights protesters, peace marchers who stayed in our home

I am from joke books, vocabulary-building books, Mad

From the sand lot where we played softball and the street not too busy for a child to cross to get to the sand lot

I am from Lawry's Seasoned Salt, which could be added to any dish. Its chemicals are probably still lodged in my fat

Speaking of fat

I am from Hostess cupcakes

I am from the blackboard built into the wall where we'd scribble for hours

From the piano four out of five family members played

From the local library. I was so excited to get to use the adult section years after I was ready for it

From the D Suzuki book that gave me a deep understanding of Buddhism, City Without Jews by Hugo Bettauer, the complete Ring cycle in the best renditions (somebody at the library must have understood music)

I am from the window poles we used in the sweltering Springs of Washington DC to let air into the classroom, the structured learning books in red and orange that taught me the New Math. I am probably the only student in that classroom to ever make practical use of the New Math

From vaporizers and Vicks VaporRub, bread with jam but no butter because my mother was convinced butter was bad for a cold. Why she thought I wanted the jam I don't know, because I never liked the jam, almost always grape, but I dutifully at it because...well, because I had a cold

From the bamboo forest on a hidden plot of land down a long driveway at the other end of my block

From science fiction books bearing the must of the basement where I always sat to read them

From Roadrunner cartoons that should by all assessments have turned me into mass murderer

So path was definitely uphill

------

April 17, 2020

The swoosh of air just came through a floor vent, indicating that the
heat came on. Just for a moment. As we enter the second half of April
in Boston, cold snaps are still encircling us. I saw snow during the
first hours of dawn yesterday. I heard later that this divertissement
was granted only to those living in the Heights. Judy braved the cold
recently to take a walk, but I've been exrcising inside.

When winter first lifted, we welcomed the bright, longer days with
their still chipper air. But now I'm ready for real Spring. Lacking a
reason to leave the house--and being implored to stay within it as
much as I can, in fact--I need the beneficence of warm weather to pull
me out.

And next, I think of people not privileged enough to have a nice warm
room, or not privileged enough to stay in from working, or not
privileged enough to have space where they can escape for an hour from
the rest of the family. The brief rush of air from a floor vent
brought me each of these thoughts.

---

The heat has come back on, and is staying on, thrusting air noisily
through the floor vents for minutes at a time. While it's catching up
with the unnoticeable chill that must have come over the house while I
was just writing, I think back to the rush of hot air that would wash
over us all last winter.

It was an indolent time. We stayed in a lot. Winter is the most
hectic season for the arts, with theater shows and concerts and museum
openings piling up on top of one another, but we were supporting my
adult child and partner last winter, so we curtailed our
entertainments.

I was out downtown near my old job a couple times during the bustle
just preceding Christmas, and came home to write a poem about the halo
gathering over the scene, where buses and shops and pedestrians were
all taken up with activity. I still have people and places that I deal
with near Downtown Crossing, and it's strange to think that after the
pandemic has eased I will return to those places so familiar from the
years working for my old company. I hope my sedentary habits don't
stick around. I know that all the arts organizations are fervently,
anxiously hoping for that too. Meanwhile, I'm home. It's national
poetry month, a good month to sit back and write nine poems.

------

April 24, 2020

Sara asked us, as she does every week, to look out of our
windows. Today, instead, I looked out of Sara's window, as it was
visible in our Zoom conference. The purple and yellow flowers on her
window sill were enthralling. but I remembered that one of my house
plants had also bloomed a couple weeks ago. The plant had been left by
our child and their partner when we forced them to get out and get
their own apartment. Even after seeing the slender white bloom we had
no idea what the plant was.

The memory made me think of what it's like to spend 23 hours a day in
the house I have lived in for some 37 years. What have I not noticed
before in this house? I found that out while doing a meditation online
a couple weeks ago led by Peter Feinmann. Although I was rarely able
to suspend my racing thoughts--meditation does not come to me with
ease--I did look around in a mentally open state and saw my living
room as I had not really seen it for decades. Surveying languidly the
antiques, the heirloom book collection, the Oriental, and the photos,
I realized what a beautiful home Judy and I had made: a home of
precious objects, of repose, of love.

I am glad we did not sell this house before COVID-19 hit. It is a
familiar house. My home for nearly my entire adult life, it is the
home I want whan I can't go out in the world.

---

In my initial piece today, I used both the words "flower" and "bloom"
for variety. These are essentially synonyms, whether used as nouns or
as verbs. It is lovely to have choices in the English language,
drawing deeply from both the Romance and the Germanic languages. When
I think of Bloom, I think of the lead character in Joyce. This is an
idle period for many people, a time they can undertake a substantial
reading project they might balk at other times. I have read Ulysses
already. Also War and Peace and other major Russian novels. Almost all
of Dickens, all of Shakespeare. Well, plenty is left for me. I started
Don Quixote in both Spanish and English a few years ago, but my
efforts petered out. Several tomes by George Eliot line my
shelves. I'm not even considering modern authors such as Pynchon and
Stephenson.

But my major excursion into big reading is the study of the entire
Bablyonian Talmud, which I started back in January with tens of
thousands of others in the seven-and-a-half year Daf Yomi cycle. This
is a community project. We form a community in my synagogue and on a
Facebook page people post to from around the world.

I am very disciplined in my Facebook postings. Unlike others, I don't
muse about my personal habits and their stochastic relationshps to
rabbinic throughts from 2000 years ago. I don't navel-gaze and try to
find a facile spirituality in activities that the ancients conceived
to be plenty spiritual already. I do post about dilemmas in the text,
about subtleties in the Hebrew that can illuminate meaning, and about
implications of rulings.

------

May 1, 2020

There used to be a popular poster that consisted of nothing but photos
of doors. Doors of houses, churches, painted in beautiful colors or
weathered by centuries. After a trip to Prague, where Judy was
hyper-alert to doors, she put together on Snapfish her own poster of
doors. But I wondered today why she hung her poster right inside our
own front door. Like Magritte, was she wryly contrasting reality with
artistic fiction? Right now, her 15 or 16 door seem to beckon me to a
wider world, one which is denied to me as I cannot trespass beyond our
own door.

I did venture out today, however, although rain was pelting the
concrete at 9 AM. I was on the noblest of missions, headed to one of
those most essential institutions, the liquor store. It was indeed a
noble venture, because Judy and I had carefully nursed our wine
colleciton over the past several weeks down to one bottle of red. But
tonight is Shabbat, and Judy prefers white. Hence the trip to my old
stand-by, Mall Liquors at Fresh Pond.

But what's this? A lone figure standing outside a darkened door.
Someone with groceries. He didn't speak to me. Was he waiting to be
picked up? Or hoping to gain entry to the liquor store? If the latter,
he was looking forward to an hour in the rain, because Mall Liquors
had imperiously decided to delay opening by an hour--and hadn't
updated their web site.

Luckily, I hopped over to Say-Mor Liquors across the the highway, open
when they said they'd be. I will return no more to Mall Liquors.
Updating a web site would take 30 seonds--I've done it innumerable
times. I have no patience for a business that disrespects its faithful
customers.

Coming home, I learned that Ed Markey had collected all the signatures
he needed for nominating papers. It reminded me that there's even a
bigger world out there. I try to remain a part of it. I managed to
sign Markey's nominating papers (along with Katherine Clark's) even
though the campgaign never sent them to me, thanks to a local friend
who brought me a copy.

---

Reality is further than ever from me these days. As a kid, I learned
how tenuous reality is. I was playing bridge one pleasant Spring
evening in our house in Washington, DC when I was twelve years
old. Not until the next morning did we open the newspaper to learn
that the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. had been killed. Others were not
so behind the times as we. Many had been out destroying 14th and U,
and other parts of black Washington. We were traumatized that morning
not only by the political tragedy, not only by the brutal, raw
violence, but by our privileged ignorance. My father watched the 10:00
or 11:00 news every night from then on.

I never know about wars, earthquakes, or bombings except through the
news. But now I feel I know nothing at all. I depend on media or
friends, both bearing their biases and limited attentions, for
everything outside the signals my stomach gives me when it's time to
eat.

But there are compensations for this obliviousness of existence. I am
more in touch with the inner fantastic world of my own cerebral lobes.
I have written 16 poems this past month, in honor of National Poetry
Month. Two have been published. I think poets are the people willing
to approach mostly closely the edge of their own derangement--at
least, those who do so but pull back before tumbling in. If other
people can be kind enough to hear my fabulous truth, as I hear theirs,
the perilous journey will be worth it.

------

May 15, 2020

It's bright outside. The chandelier here in the dining room is not
only redundant but assaultive. I would like to be outside, but I have
assigned tasks to myself. I've taken on a research project. It's one I
should have done 40 yars ago, but I had too much to learn and skimped
on the history of world cultures. But yesterday, I got an idea for a
poem that filled me with a thirst for exploring the countries about
which I know so little.

Did you know that many of the best paintes and writers of the Ming
dynasty were female? I was looking for a male painter to put in my
poem, but realized I needed to honor the women instead. However, to
empathize with their motivations and how they viewd the world could
take months of research.

And so it goes for so many cultures.

I painfully sense being cut off from research. I was never a good
researcher in college. I couldn't discipline myself to find just the
six books I'd need to satisfy the requirements of an assignment. My
reading is intense but inwardly directed.

The Minuteman library system has an impressive distributed
collection. These literally gather dust while we all shelter at home.
The online offerings are skimpy set, aimed toward entertainment rather
than enlightenment.

Rummaging through dank basement shelves, I found the sole
representative in my own house of the resources I need. A book of
American Indian legends, which now sits on my reading shelf. The
libraries won't be open by the time I am ready for them.

---

Assigned

When I was in school, I had to grapple with homework assignments. An
assignment signaled that the student was not independent. The teacher
or professor made the choices and the student had to follow the chosen
paths. I always hated assignments. I hated them even more when I
realize that the plain wording of the assignment harbored a deeper
assignment to assuage the biases of the person creating the
assignment. Disgrace awaited one who took the assignment as a
launching pad for creative exploration. In additino to readig the
assinged quesiton, one also had to produce an assigned answer.

Instead of assigned work, I like signed work. Signed work is that for
which I take responsibility. I have chosen the subject, chosen the
context, and chosen the angle to pursue.

I was not lucky in school, but I have been very lucky since. I can
find at almost every stage of my career an instance where somebody
said, "Do this in whatever way you think best. Take the topic and run
with it." I was fantastically lucky in my very first tech writing job,
when as a novice I was handed an inadequate manual and told to do
anything I thought was needed to improve it. From that mandate I
developed the writing process that guided much of the rest of my
career.

I was asked to become a journalist when I didn't know either what it
would require or how far it would take me. I was asked to blog before
I saw any value to it. These could be considered assignments, but they
left me the freedom to produce useful content I coud proudly sign.
They became my signature accomplishments.

------

May 22, 2020

I took a walk to a far corner of my town yesterday, because I have
been using social isolation as a chance to seek out walking routes in
new places. If you go for about half an hour west of my house, over
the Heights, you get near Route 2. Wherever a highway sices through a
built-up area like this, odd patches of unusable land are left between
the houses and the highway. Then, in New England at least, Nature
returns to take back her own. I encountered groves by the side of the
road I was walking. They didn't look like much to an adult, a rather
dismal clump of lost forest, but to a small child they would be enough
room for a play journey. Many small patches of trees grew in my
neighbhood when I was young. Going back to check on them as an adult,
I found them all built over. I swear that a bamboo grow once occupied
a neighbor's back yard.

My parents told me that one of the earliest phrases I said as a todder
was "walk in the woods". They also liked the woods. We had plenty of
options in the Washington area. I rarely got into Rock Creek Park, but
I thrilled just at crossing the bridges that connected different parts
of the District across Rock Creek. Glover Archibald Park, about half a
mile from my childhood home, snaked through residential developments.
But for a small kid, "walk in the woods" could be a clump of bamboo in
a back yard. My love of Nature extended to them all.

---

I just invented the term "play journey". I think of children secreting
themselves in a secluded spot and the imagination rushing to the ends
of the universe. You needed a place to hold a play journey, but it
could be as simple as the closet under the stairs in your house. If
you had the side of an uninhabited mountain to play in, all the
better. The key was not the physical space you returned to at the
end, but the places you went on your play journey. I wonder whether
child psychologists have other terms for this activity. Most
children's literature, such as the Narnia series, take a play journey
as their starting point and suppose it to be a real one.

------

May 29, 2020

The last time Sonny visited, they extracted the shofar someone had
given as a gift 20 years ago from the cabinet, put it to their lips,
and sent a thundering hircine retort through the house. Where did
Sonny learn to blow the shofar? In which of their thousand viola
lessons did the teacher explain how to parse the lips properly and
summon power from the lungs?

Our cabinet, made of glass, shows off decades of odd found objets as
if they were intimate friends. The fine tile from Portugal, now
broken, lies above the cheap cable car souvenir from San
Francisco. Whatever we want to use when we have formal gatherings (may
they return someday) stand next to porcelain we proudly showed off in
the past but have no use for any more.

I wonder whether all the prized posssession in this cabinet are
permanently in cold storage, no more needed than the old saki cups or
the shofar no one in the house can make a sound on. We'll have to
feast among just the two of us, pulling out delicate French dishes and
the stolid, squat English teapot. We'll have to celebrate the victory
of finding something to celebrate.

---

When our kids were young and we visited San Francisco, of course we
had to take the cable cars. I remember an hour of storytelling,
singing, and answering science questions to keep the children patient
while we waited in line. The packed-in trip up and down a hill,
landing us down at Market Street where we really didn't want to be,
was less memorable. But the creaking, clanking cable car is a must-do
for every tourist to the City. Many also visit the central station
where the massive cables wind their way on their different assignments
through the city.

What often goes unmentioned is that the cable car is often the best
way to get someplace. I have used it when my starting point and
destination were happily located near a line. The cable car is
uncomfortable, arcane, and a little scary--one San Franciscan told me
that near the bottom of a long, steep hill one can smell the burning
of the wooden btrake against the cable--and yet it was a briliant
solution for a city with a burgeoning population and a unique
topology.

I wish we had such variety of transportation everywhere today. The
cable car reminds us that the right way to get from point A to point B
depends on many factors that come together differetnly for each place:
density; layout; housing, work, and leisure patterns; geography;
climate; people's own preferences; regulatory regime; and probably a
dozen other things a transportation expert could cite.

------

June 5, 2020

Judy bought new salt and pepper shakers a few years ago. She is
regularly in the market for salt and pepper shakers. I thnk that,
after 37 years in our house, we finally have an acceptable set of
shakers in both the dining room and the kitchen. But Judy has been
very particular.

The shakers in the dining room are simpler, perhaps because more
dexterous seasoning is called for when cooking than when serving. They
are pretty, though. Their transparent plastic cases are colored in
strips of red, green, yellow, and blue. They refract light from the
windows, so that one day I saw them shine like festival candelabras.
They cast multicolored flames across our wooden dining room table. I
quickly snapped half a dozen pictures on my cell phone. I think these
may be art shots.

I hope we can keep all our shakers. And that we can find exactly the
right coarseness of salt to grind in them.

---

Jewish calendars are replete with special dates called festivals,
shuttling along at their own pace as the calendar adjusts itself every
year. Jewish communities spend a lot of time planning festivals. We
fill the days approaching each festival with talk of how we'll observe
it.

But the word "festival" doesn't feel right to me as a term for modern
Jewish holidays. When I think of "festival" it calls to mind
"festive", bringing along images of a São Paulo Mardi Gras or a Hindi
gathering by the Ganges.

Jews used to have festivals like those. We'd gather several times a
year by the Temple that united us all, then slaughter cows and sheep
festively, feast festively, and cry out prayers such as "Praise the
blessed God" at the top of our lungs.

That's the report that came down to us, at least. I don't quite trust
the legends because footing it to Jerusalem is a lot of effort,
especially with a couple sheep in tow, and because much of the time
locals were disgusted by the corruption of the Temple elders, as
recorded from the book of Samuel to Second Temple times.

But after the Temple was gone, festivals of a more intimate sort could
still be had. The men would all get drunk and bellow out songs a
couple times a year. Honored members of the community rushed about
synagogues carrying scrolls, while women sidled up close under the
pretext of honoring the Torah. Most holidays ratcheted back the
celebratory aspect of a festival, though, substituting sober prayer
and mumbles over sacred texts.

At my synagogue, we have recaptured a bit of the festive glory of the
High Holidays. Some 15 hours stretched over three days of Rosh
HaShanah and Yom Kippur culminate in a community Havdalah as we all
prepare for the imminent satisfaction of our aching stomachs. We
shout, we sing. In pre-COVID-19 times we packed together and threw
arms around each other. May redemption come speedily again.

------

June 12, 2020

I grabbed some old paper to do today's writing exercise, like every
week. The writing on the reverse side of the top piece of paper showed
through, beaming up at me the name "Nat Turner" in bright multicolored
crayon.

Why did I write "Nat Turner"? Why did I put the letters of this name
bearing tragic memories in childish primary colors?

This past Sunday was my first participation in a public
event--ignoring online ones--since the government required physical
distancing. A rally was called in Arlington Center to support the
people of color around the world protesting for their rights. Everyone
was asked to bring a sign bearing the name of a black person killed by
the police. The organizers didn't offer a time frame, so I figured I
could go back as far in history as I wanted.

I had run out of posterboard and drawing pads, so I used standard
paper from our copier. I started with ink and covered the letters with
thick crayon lines, using as many different colors as I could. At the
time, I told myself that I needed many bright colors to draw attention
to the paper. But now I feel that the colorful array was a signal to
myself. I needed some bright color during these suppressed times. Now
it beams up at me, five days later, and reminds me of the beaming
rainbow march.

Two days ago I went on a different sort of walk--a fast stroll through
my neighborhood for my health and mental balance. The bright colors of
the flowers cheered me like the crayon colors of the sign. They made
me remember how much I love the precious Earth, and I vowed to save
the flowers.

I was planning this week a call with my Massachusetts representative
about climate legislation. Today is the call. I have spent the morning
preparing for it in online meetings, but I also knew I needed a break
to concentrate for an hour on my writing class.

---

Time frames have collapsed in our time of COVID-19, collapsed like
dismantled tent poles. I can't set a time frame for withdrawing
financial support from my adult child--a plan Judy and I put together
in early March--because COVID-19 makes it so hard to earn a living. We
proudly offered the plan, and got our child to accept it (at least in
principle) at a moment right on the edge of the enormosu cliff that
our economy fell off during the next couple weeks. A poorly chosen
time frame.

I have no time frame for stopping the hemorrhage of my savings, but
mortgage and health insurance and utility bills and taxes all have to
be honored during their previously appointed time frames.

Others have it much worse than we do, I know. They have no
cushion. Unemployed workers withhold their rents, landlords without
rents default on their tax payments, governments without tax incomes
cut staff and benefits--and still more become unemployed, cycling
through the terrifying destruction again. This is how economic
depressions go. Now the best I can do is hope to be alive when all
this is over. And hope to use this time frame of unknown length to
repair the larger breach in the world.

------

June 19, 2020

I have received email from the Center for Jewish life for years--I
don't know how I got on their email list--but just since the pandemic
descended and houses of worship had to shut down, I noticed that Rabbi
Avi Bukiet from that Chabad center was holding online classes. The
Zoom era has allowed uncountable riches to come to everyone online, a
flattening of education that lets us listen to talks in Tel Aviv, Los
Angeles, or wherever an organization happens to sponsor a speaker, who
may be world-famous. In this case, Zoom lets me enjoy the Hasidic
wisdom of a teacher whose home a mile and a half from here I never set
foot in. Rabbi Bukiet is very sweet and nearly explodes with
compassion when he starts to expound on some incident in the life of
the Besht or a new angle in a familiar Torah passage.

Why do I want this new source of religious inspiration in my life? My
own synagogue has plenty of intellectual stimulation and lovely online
services. My own Rabbi offers Torah study about once a month, but I
get scads of it in the weekly Torah study and Daf Yomi discussions.

But I like Rabbi Avi's angle. I would like to weight the scales of my
spritual understandung with more Kabalah, more Ḥasidism, more
fatalism. He is sophisticatd and represents those sides of our
tradition adeptly.

Before Shavuot, Rabbi Avi distributed gift bags to his followers. I
had been cosen to be on this list. He must have simply looked up my
address in the phone boook (unless I had entered it long ago into an
online form). I ate his cheesecakes (which were fine even though I
left them on a warm porch for a coupe days to avoid bringing a virus
into the house), so I gave the Center a $36 donation.

---

After an hour walk that dries me out or a nap that leaves me unsteady
on my feet, I may dip into the ice cream tubs that we've started
keeping around. Occasionally I sample the cookies I've been buying for
Judy. These are new habits since physical distancing started. When I
was young, I had too many sweets. A party or even a Shiva was
dangerous--the next Shiva might have been for me. So many years ago, I
gave up processed sugars, cold turkey. (I actually eat a lot of cold
turkey now.)

The pandemic allows me to rebalance my life. A cookie does not put me
im danger. It's as if I have stretched my decisions to a time plot two
orders of magnitude larger than what I was using before. Whereas I
used to watch my food intake anxiously hour by hour, now I think of
how it will average out over months. I am neither losing nor gaining
weight. Like the rest of life, food has settled into an easily
anticipated monotony.

Today Judy is baking for the first time in months. She wanted to bake,
but knew I had sworn off sweets and felt she wouldn't be able to use
up a pie or cake. But she then saw that I had loosened my
discipline. So chocolate cake it will be.

------

June 26 2020

Life is enhanced by odd neighbors. I hope I am not an odd neighbor,
although I'm the one that the neighbors know will always knock at
their doors when there's a ballot question or a candidate who needs
nominating papers. And then there was the time the fifth-grader next
door asked me to buy something (perhaps gift wrap?) to support
Brackett School, but I didn'tlike the gift wrap, so instead I told her
I would walk up to Brackett School and hand-deliver a check. When I
carried out my promise, the prinicpal at first suspected me of being a
sexual predator, but soon saw my honesty and gave me a tour of the new
school, which I keenly desired because it had been gutted and rebuilt
right after my last kid graduated.

But as for odd neighbors, we enjoy the ones two doors away, a real
estate agent Ted who salivates for the day we are ready to sell (no
time soon) and his artist and folk musician wife, Su-Su. She fashions
paper mache sculptures of funny-looking people. Every couple months a
new, stocky, scarecrow-like figure appears in front of the house,
where the world can see it, or in her back yard where only a handful
of her odd neighbors can survey it. A few sculptures now bear masks.

---

Someday we'll have to sell. It is just ridiculous for two middle-aged
people to take up a whole house with so many rooms I have lost count.
We have the same excuses most people trot out for why they need space:
the baby grand, the sewing area where Judy lays out full-sized
quilts. But we can exhaust those excuses, and still we occupy too much
space.

We know that the house can accommodate five people fairly comfortably.
That is, if those five people get along. Finding five who are totally
comfortable with one another is a challenge. We've tried it
twice. With dissension, even two is too many. Perhaps even one.

We lack excuses for staying here, but instead of excuses we cite
barriers. We are happy in Arlington, with the kind of people we meet
here. The house looks out upon pristine pines and maples in
conservation land that will never be spoiled. Public transportation,
in times without a pandemic, is highly convenient. And on a day with
light traffic we can get to our synagoguge--again when the pandemic
lifts--in under fifteen minutes.

Someday we will start clearing out our basement. That may clear us to
take off to a new home. But it's not what clogs our basement that
anchors us to this house.

------

July 3, 2020

The cup is glazed in the color of a freshly mown field and embossed
with the idealized shapes of leaves and fruits. It is a cup for
leisiured people who, like me today, can sit on a deck that they might
call a veranda and just fold their hands around the enlivening coffee
mug as they contemplate with satisfaction the simple passage of time.
Is this green mug a vision of the world that could be? What then is
the world that is? Some (C.S. Lewis) say the cup is a world just as
real as the contentious one we see on the front pages of newspapers.
Neither world exists for the other. Neither is a side effect of the
other; one did not grow organically or through the machinations of the
human mind from the other. I don't think anyone really lives in the
world of the newspaper front pages. No matter how much time they have
been forced to live in that world, even if it has been since birth,
they really see themselves in the setting of the green cup. Otherwise,
they wouldn't last.

---

I can't get the scene off my mind. There is some kind of memorial
across the street. Where I am at the moment I don't see it, but I know
what it looks like. And while I mill about the members of the
congregation where I have spent most of my adult lkfe, an unknown
woman of indeterminate age and race invites me to a ceremony her group
is holding at the memorial. I am filled with curiosity as to what this
will look like. I anticipate it.

But instead I find myself on the couch. I had to get up early because
the sun was out and things left over from yesterday evening were on my
mind, so I read during the early morning and then gave in again to
sleep. I know the elements of the past week that made it into the
dream. There was the interfaith planning meeting that I attended
online with local friends and synagogue members. They talked about my
state rep, and so did the symbol-woman in the dream. But as I pushed
myself tenuously off the couch, I still hoped to recapture that
memorial, and the ceremony I never got to see there.

---

Being at home all the time shreds one's sleep schedule. Even in the
dark of winter, the living room tempts me by 5 or 6 in the morning.
The whole day becomes a pendulum swinging from wakefulness to sleep,
with long groggy periods at the beginning and end of each bout of
activity. I can go through three periods of sleep each day, happy to
nap twice. But I think a new epoch of creativity is awarded to me each
time I get up.

------

July 10, 2020

A couple months ago, Judy and I shifted the dining room table and
chairs into the living room to turn over the rug and expose a colorful
banner from our lives 20 years ago. Judy figured, correctly, that the
underside of the braided rug had preserved most of the bright tints we
chose in a small store on the Cape a generation ago. They set out
hundreds of ropes in all the colors a palette might bear, and told us
to pick out the strands we though would combine well; they would braid
the eight-foot-long oval rug and deliver it to us. Sonny was just a
child, but had already manifested artistic talent and took pleasure in
lining up braids and determinig the selection. Why wasn't Sam there?
He must have been old enough to attend one of his music camps. Maybe
we were in the rug store because it was a rainy day. Maybe it was just
a nice break from a weekend of soft ice crem and burning sand. Maybe
we needed a rug in our dining room.

I guess Judy decided recently to reclaim brightness in our house. So
we flipped the rug, and the ocean and the bay came into our dining
room.

---

I'm at the dining room table where I routinely do our Friday writing
exercise. What's different today is our camera, dislodged from its
place on a rack of shelves. The camera used to go everywhere with us.
Judy, the artist, loved to stop wherever she happened to be, line up
her shot for a couple of minutes, and click in place a memory. I
learned that there was no hope of hurrying her along, no matter the
appointment we had made for a tourist stop, no matter the heat or
rain. She had to capture that vision no one but she could see, the
scene that looked dull and mundane on the street but became a living
curiosity in the camera frame. So many of these mysterious, lovely
images cover the walls of our house, each panel a different part of
Europe or the West.

It's rare to see the camera out now. Judy hasn't been anywhere that
triggers the same awe as in the past. With my cell phone recently, I
snapped a shot of Judy on the beach. But with her wearing a cloth
mask, and a friend standing a bare six feet away, also masked, the
picture didn't seem worth saving. Only new quilts call for a photo
shoot now. Luckily, we've had a couple of those.

------

July 24, 2020

The famous Jerusalem Cookbook sits, along with a couple others, on a
side table. Cookbooks are scattered about the room for easy perusal:
on side tables, desks, under the living room table. Can the world
provide so many new tastes? Can my parents-in-law, after 90 years of
eating, notice some unexperienced combinaton of the same meats,
plants, and spices that traders have dragged across the globe for
thousands of years?

For last Friday's Shabbat dinner we had a fine dish that Judy's father
Irwin makes regularly and that Judy has adapted for parties: salmon in
picking spices. After heating the salmon a bit, you leave it in brine
in the fridge for up to two weeks. A little red onion piques the
flavor.

That was fairly unusual the first time we had it, but now it's a
familiar delicacy. Maybe the Jerusalem Cookbook, assembled at the
intersection of three continents, has other ground-breaking
experiments in cuisine. I don't know what makes a great dish, because
I'm a decidely competent cook. Something made the steak I ate at the
Metropolitan Restaurant on the Upper West Side something to remember
for the next ten years, but I can't say what that was. a special
application of caramelized onion? An aggressive surfeit of black
pepper?

And what was in that turtle soup I had in New Orleans back in 2009?
I'll never forget that. In comparison to that patient visitor from the
past, the rabbit I ate in France races by and disappears into the
catacombs of memory.

---

In my previous writing exercise I used the word "competent"
dismissively, criticizing myself for being "merely" competent. In
gourmet circles, I think people really do look for cuisine that is
more than merely competent. When English speakers resort to French,
they are striving for the transcendent--for something beyond words.

But most other people value competence during these days where it has
so often departed. Signs on lawns say "Any functioning adult for
President." I walk around Friendship Heights, on the border between
D.C. and Maryland, and quickly lose count of the Biden signs. I figure
that whenever I see a Biden sign, it's on the lawn of a Federal
employee. I have not seen a single sign for another candidate.

I seek more than competence when I do my writing job. This makes my
job search hard, because I offer too much. The employers look at my
roster of award-winning books and unique reports and don't know what
to do with me. They end up settling for a more conventional applicant
who promises competence.

------

July 31, 2020

I should spend hours on this deck. The children's noise is so far
away, there's no traffic, not even bunnies disturb the yard. I am so
happy to have finished the drive back from Washington, D.C. and so
relaxed to have an outdoor space to sit, after days in my in-laws'
apartment. But settled here on the deck, I feel compelled to check the
health of my houseplants. Was it natural for all the petals to fall
from the night sky petunias? Why are there brown flowers on the
hydrangeas, which all used to be blue? I had entrusted the watering of
my plants to the 12-year-old next door. Did she really follow through?

But sitting here gives me access to key data about the situation: I
can see the blue hydrangeas in my neighbors' yard, and these bushes
too have brown spots. I watch my neighbors and I know they're great
caretakers of their plot of land--not like me. If they have brown
hydrangeas, I know it's the natural progression of the season, and
that 12-year-old Sophie took as loving care of my plants as her family
did of theirs. And as proof, our basic is branching boisterously and
moistly up toward the sky. There are indications that pesto is on our
menu for this week and I will give some to the neighbors.

---

I'm isolating myself very diligently during the pandemic, but I've
been outdoors more than I ever have, taken month by month. For many
people, walking and biking and other odd forms of propelling
themselves take the place of the gym. I can exercise in the house, but
this Spring and Summer I felt I should find a way to get out of the
damn house. (The house I'm so happy to be occupying again after a
two-week trip to Judy's parents.) So I go out 30 minutes, 40, 50 in
some direction, taking in things a stone's throw from my house that I
had never seen before. Some of the architecture in our mostly mundane
part of town is gorgeous. Just three days ago, having explored every
other direction from my in-laws' apartment, I struck out due south and
discovered that in 32 minutes I could get to the house where I was
raised and spent my first 17 years. The house looked better now than I
remember it. I also found that 40 minutes east of the in-laws, I could
get almost to Rock Creek Park. That's an excursion I hope I can take
again, but it depends on the pandemic coming under control, which I
sense will not happen because of government sabotage.

So I think we will all be stuck indoors when Winter comes again. Judy
is convinced we can take nice walks in the Winter, too. But I don't
think I'll want to be outdoors for an hour and a half at a time
then. I fear the confinement. But I'll always keep myself busy.

------

August 7, 2020

I've been ecological this week. We got back from a two-week trip and
noticed that one of our trash barrels, which was left on the deck
without its lid, became half-full of rain-water. So I've watered my
plants with this, sparing the tap in the kitchen.

One of the petunias just blossomed again in purple flowers. When we
got back, it was barren. This was the second flowering plant we had
brought this Sprig, trying to brighten our dull pandemic days. Judy
seemed to need flowers, and the African daisy we bought (also purple)
didn't thrive in our hanging plant holder. Distancing aside, I
returned to Wilson Farm for petunias. When their petals fell away, I
was ungrateful enough to suspect the girl next door of not watering
out plants enough while we were gone. But the petunias came back, as
if they had just been politely waiting out our trip to Washington.

And the petunias came just as a colleague approached me to offer a
flourishing contract that should pay well for at leat two months. I
can push off worries about our financial future for a couple more
months, as my career comes into bloom again for at least one more
summer.

---

My son Sam asked me to join him in studying an opera he has to teach,
Parsifal. I took him up on it, even though I've alwys found Parsifal
boring outside of two or three beautiful moments. For the most part, I
agreed because it's a rare chance to communicate with him. He's so
busy that he often doesn't answer an email or text message. And of
coure, music is the passion we share. Of course this is the perfect
topic to work on together.

But besides this father-son bond, I am curious to see whether the
deepening study I've done over the past couple decades, both in music
and in religion, can bring me a new pleasure in listening to Parsifal.
As an outsider, I would like to delve into the profound, paradoxical
Christianity of late Wagner and to help my Christian convert son enjoy
his adopted tradition more.

Sam asked me to help with Parsifal because I had helped him in a pinch
with the Ring Cycle during the previous semester. He had been pulled
in to discuss it suddenly (perhaps due to teaching changes required by
the pandemic) and found the plot and philosophy too tangled to pick up
quickly. Having loved and communed with the Ring for decades, I was
honored and thrilled to explain it to him. Let's hope Parsifal is as
much fun.

------

August 21, 2020

I feel quiet sitting out on my deck, with the woods behind my house
shutting out everyday neighbor activities. But to start today's
writing exercise, I shut my eyes, giving me a higher appreciation for
the sounds of the back deck.

The sounds of the deck stand in layers. Closest to me are the
crickets, which even after several hours of sun are crackling and
buzzing busily. Further off, in the next layer, are the shouts of
little children--the best sounds of all, becaused they mean that
parents think it's safe to to go the park. And the last layer is the
traffic on the highway beyond the park.

My life takes place in layers, more and more. There's the house, where
hardly anyone comes, and the deck, where we allow a few friends.  The
street where walking is safe, and the more crowded urban neighborhood
downtown that I went to  yesterday.

It was a strange errand that took me to East Boston, which I later
learned has the highest rate of COVID-19 infections in our state. It's
also the current home of Richard Stallman, a legendary leader in the
computing field. We had been talking recently about my memoir, parts
of which he reviewed in detail down to the word. He appearently felt
lonely and asked me to visit. We walked around his neighborhoos like
sentries parolling a dangerous territory. About half the residents of
this supremely at-risk neighborhood wore masks in the street. We had
to dodge cars and cross streets bakc and forth to avoid those without
masks.

I didn't like my walk with Stallman, because he's interested in a
pretty limited range of topics and I had trouble finding things to
talk about. Visiting him was a mitzvah.

I'm also teasing out the layers in my new contract position. I work
with a very collegial, open group of people where anything can
supposedly be freely discussed. We share things among ourselves that
we don't share with our client. But it gets complicated. The manager
of my organization has worked a lot with some employees of the client,
and has identified some who are on our wavelength and others who are
not. To the ones aligned with our values, we can confide a lot more,
but not everything. And then there are online public groups we run for
our client, which add multiple more layers.

This all occurs to me while reading the part of the Talmud that
discusses different layers of publc and private, and the
accommodations that can turn one domain into another. I skim arguments
that continually come to a conclusion and then open up again.  Do you
need a flat block of wood to set off an alley, or just a small post?
Maybe two small posts? Maybe two on eacfh side? How does a courtyard
differ from an alley? Is throwing an object from one to the other
allowed?

---

August 30, 2020

Elul Psalm 27 exercise

Psalm 27:3

Feeling embattled and needing trust: that perfectly describes the past week, where I  was given tasks that I either didn't fully understand or could not do/ The manager of my contract employer, Leadingbit, wanted high-level, creative thinking from me about our tasks working for IEEE SA Open. We were simultaneously setting up tools for documentation and communication that weren't quire ready, and it was like setting up for battle while construction crews were making our barracks and storehouses. I was gradually learning what IEEE SA Open is, and what we were asked to do. I wasn't ready to do high-level thinking. I was afraid I would fail. Also, because the tools weren't set up right, I wasn't seeing parts of our site and felt totally confused. The tension was unbearable and my Tourette's went into overdrive. Now I ams stable and productive. Once I explained my problems, I received more guidance from the manager. The tools were fixed.  For several days, I needed more trust.

------

August 28, 2020

I have a new office. For years my office was the easy chair that Judy
inherited from her grandparents, which is conveniently next to our
1970s-era stereo system. But as you could guess, the chair dates from
a time before the term "ergonomic" was even invented. I always knew it
would be better for me to sit at a a table, and Judy finally cast the
die by tidying up the computer desk in the guest room for us. All
stations I like on our stereo system I can get over the Internet, and
I rarely play records, tapes, or CDs. So I don't need to be in the
living room. Hey, if I am suddenly taken by a wave of fatigue, as will
happen after hours of work, the guest bed is nearby.

What's odd about the guest room is that it has an atavism almost as
out of place as a tape player: an Ethernet cable. In theory, I could
get faster and more reliable Internet by plugging the cord into a
computer. But does a MacBook Pro take an Ethernet cable? I don't think
the accessory even has a socket for one. There were years in this
house when cables would stretch between rooms, so that our kids could
use AOL instant messaging or whatever. Now the house is quiet, and
Judy and I don't even know which room the other is in.

---

Why haven't I taken a walk for several days? The cooler air means I
could go out safely at any time of the day. I could say I'm busy, but
that would be an excuse. I have started a new contract, but it has
left me plenty of time to study Hebrew and carry on other favorite
activities. I don't ascribe my sedentary turn to laziness, because I
have gotten to love walking and listening to music on my phone. I
think that walking is too slow to assuage my nervousness. Biking, if I
still had a bike, might have been more calming. I just don't know yet
whether I'm succeeding at the tasks given to me. For a few days of
directionless thrusts at activity, the anxiety nearly disabled me.
Now things are much better. I might be able to walk.

---

September 3, 2020

Elul Psalm 27 exercise

Psalm 27 is a bit melodramtic. Swings between highs and lows, between
aspiration, terror, and job.

Psalm 27:5

I had a strongly negative reaction to this verse. It reminds me of the
frustration of being isolated in my house at a time when we all should
be on the streets. We should be arguing, demonstarting, ensuring that
the evil of this day is impressed on everyone's minds. Verse 5 in this
context seems like a sentence to imprisonment. Even our digital forums
isolate us so that we can't reach those who are asleep and deluded.

------

September 4, 2020

When Marina mentioned being in a rental cotage with candles but no
matches, i took me back some 25 years to a trip Judy and I took to
Florence.  We stayed in a B&B there. Whe the proprietor showed us our
lovely room, I noticed a candle and asked her where the matches
were. I didn't really care whether we used the candle. But I had
memorized a lot of Italian words, including the word for matches, and
I wanted to show off.

Thinking back to vacations taken, during this supremely isolated time,
is calming, nostalgic, and sad all at once. We ended up using the
candle. During our many excursions, I used my Italian to read all the
plaques in the museums. (English was hardly ever present.) I even had
a long conversation with a maid, and did a bit of translation for an
Australian woman. I bought clothing in the marketplace.

I was less successful at communication with bus drivers, whose
willingness to please tourists was less pressing than it was for B&B
staff and salesmen. I won't tell you where we sometimes ended up--I
don't really know.

Of course, languages comes and go with me. I can get pretty adept when
I visit another country, but my skills then fade over the years.
However, I do remember the Italian word for matches: fiammiferi.

---

I want a Labor Day weekend. To a small extent, I'll get my wish. Our
friends Bonnie Diamond and Dan Price will be visiting from Western
Massachusetts and will hold some outdoor get-togethers. But in
general, holidays don't feel like holidays any more. High Holidays
won't feel like they were, either. I will participate as I can online,
but it's hard to build up excitement. Elul used to be, for me, a
lead-up to the intensity of the Ten Days of Awe. But now it's a need
to prepare myself for disappointment, or accepting whatever I get.

---

September 10, 2020

Elul Psalm 27 exercise

Psalm 27:9

I'm constantly gratified, even amazed, by all the help I get in a
troubling time. Even though I lost my job and am supporting four
non-working people, I get help that keeps us from destitution and
deprivation. I have savings, unemployment insurance, leads from
friends that bring me some freelance income, help from relatives.

But verse 9 also makes me aware of how fraught my situation is with
uncertainty. I wonder whether the psalmist felt more confident of his
connection to God than I do of mine. Could he see God's face? I doubt
it. How could he, or I, know whether God has turned God's face toward
or away from us? Perhaps that's the source of his plea--he cannot know
whether God is watching. And what acts in our lives can assure us that
God's face is on us?

------

September 11, 2020

I hoped to look at the trees and sky for our writing exercise today,
but it's gray and evasively wet outside, although not actually
raining, so instead I'm staring at office supplies. A small box with
16 tiny drawers sits at the back of the desk. Each drawer contains a
handful of something strange that used to be needed: push pins
(although our only blackboard is downstairs), paper fasteners, and so
on. The drawers are an artifact from a time people did most clerical
work on objects you grasped in your hand, instead of in the digital
realm. I guess the cloud has forced its way to this office from the
sky outside.

Everything in my repurposed office is an artifact. The shelves are
lined with completely obsolete manuals such as a book on Photoshop 4,
and CDs that I'm sure couldn't load their software now. Envelopes,
wire racks with black felt markers. And in the corner, an antique
bottle with dried hydrangeas that must have been left there many years
ago, and are still looking good.

All I can add are artifacts of my own that seem almost as historical:
Hebrew textbooks, machberot scribbled in my diligent hand. I always
had the worst English handwriting in class when I was a kid, but my
fellow Hebrew students tell me that my Hebrew script is elegant. Have
I done something to improve myself over the past 60 years?

---

Our Hebrew teacher makes extensive use of online resources and tools,
especially since the COVID-19 bear drove us from the classroom to our
dens. But she is not a believer in online language instruction. The
robot cannot establish a relationship with a person--not yet. She says
the relationship is needed for learning. I'm sure she's applying
established educational research here.

The Thou is intensely present in our classroom, whether at Temple
Isaiah or scattered through our two-inch screens. Most of the eight
current students have been taking sigalit's class for five years or
more. We've very tight and give each other all kinds of help. One
student from Lexington visited the Israel Bookstore recently and
brought back our latest read to the houses of myself and another
student. Sigalit makes personal check-ins a big part of each Hebrew
conversation. Dikduk cmes afterward. Even when finances were short, I
never gave up this class and its considerable cost.

Besides a new community, what do I get from Hebrew class? Not much
Hebrew. Even reading a news article is still a struggle, let alone a
novel. A few faintly glowing windows do open onto the Bible and the
Mishnah. What I get above all is a feeling that the tradition is more
open to me. The path is laid out, and it's my choice how fast to pace
it.

---

September 17, 2020

Elul Psalm 27 exercise

Psalm 27:14

Verse 14 ends Psalm 27 with hope--but in an ambiguous way. The verse
mentions hope twice, but does not offer hope. Instead, it exhorts the
reader to find hope himself or herself. It gives us a job to do. We
may have hope that someday God will fix what is wrong--or that we will
come together to fix what's wrong--in our universe. But when will this
be? We learn from the history of civil rights, from the climate
stuggle, from every taste of righteousness and good, that victory
takes much longer than it should. That's why we must make our heart
courageous. Because we can run on adrenalin for a little while, but we
will flag. The courageous heart is what we need for lifelong
commitment and struggle.

------

September 18, 2020

We should get lightbulbs for the lamps in our deck. But it's getting
cool these days, so we probably won't be out here at night. I might as
well wait till late Spring to buy lightbulbs, when going to a store
will hopefully no longer be a life-and-death cost-benfit calculation.

I'm taking the writing meditation on the deck today, and thinking that
this may be the last week before Spring when it will be comfortable to
do so. Judy and I love having Zoom get-togethers on the deck so much
that I brought an extension chord up from the basement.

There are other signs of oncoming rough weather on the deck. The
flowers are all gone, and a fearsome blight has taken hold of our once
healthy basil plants. Our pesto sauce used to be copious and a
connection point with our distanced friends. We could give them gifts
of pesto, and use it as an entry point to the beach where one of
Judy's friends let us park our car.

I'll have to take the umbrella down soon too. There would probably be
blazing sunlight this week, had not California forests choked the sky.
A feature that I'm afraid will mark summer from now on.

---

My basement is a treasure house of wonders. I am not a hoarder, but
there is too much from my life that I love for me to easily
consolidate and move to an apartment. Should I toss a manual I wrote
about a long-vanished programming language, a manual on which I
created a unique and apt design and spent nine months on? How about my
collection of Judaica books, which has swelled to uncomfortable
proportions by acquisitions from my friends who did actually muster up
the will to move out? What about the two Orientals?

I call this my basement because Judy hates to set foot there. I'm
always the one to flip the circuit breaker back on or empty the
humidifier. But she, Sonny, and Shiona make it harder to reduce
clutter, because their artwork lies all around.

I take good care of our things. I buy storage bins as the collection
grows. When we had a flood, hardly anything was hurt, because I had
carefully located vulnerable items off the floor.

So I am proud of my basement and its contents. But I am
anti-materialistic enough to wish that I could make it all vanish and
not have to manage it any more.

------

September 22, 2020

The synagogue had a fifteen-minute writing meditation today focusing
on a poemt called Gratitude by Marcia Falk, a poet and Judaic
scholar. The poem didn't speak to me, but I had just come off of a
meeting an hour before with my employer, Silona Bonewald, where I had
expressed my gratitude to her: for trusting me, for bringing me on
this project, for letting me write key documents that would hopefully
guide hundreds or even thousands of technical experts.

The call was spectacular.  Not only did Silona praise my work, she
said that I had pulled together hints from her and ideas from
elsewhere and that she had really felt understood.  I felt a
professional bond developing, Going even further, she highlighted one
special trait of my writing she liked: I explain the reasons for
recommendations--why they should be honored. Of course this is
essential to my technical approach; I know that people will understand
when to apply recommendations and will accept them if they have
reasons. But Silona said she was weak at giving reasons. She asked me
to collaborate on strategic documents with her. More work, and more
responsibility--this is a great day.

------

September 25, 2020

Special writing workshop on being open at Yom Kippur.

I have been waiting for Yom Kippur because I have needed to atone for
the past forty years. This year I have finally made peace from one
person to another.

Uri Wilensky was one of my closest friends in college. A brilliant
math student, he was always breaking out from social conventions, He
would make up outrageous stories about himself and about the world
around us, He was extreemely thought-provoking as well as
entertaining, and therefore a good companion to have challenge one's
thinking.

A good example of his tall tales (not involving his own experiences)
came the very first time I met him, entering a room of another student
with whom I remained friends for sometime. Uri was bouncing a
superball, which wsa remarkable for bouncing almost as high as the
bounce before each time it hit the ground. Uri said that someone has
made a ball that could bounce higher and higher on each bounce. I
called him on this, saying it would violate the principle of
conservation of energy. He was prepared for this: "Yes," he said, "The
ball grows colder on each bounce. He admitted that the story was
fabricated only when I pointed out the theory of entropy.  But we had
established each other by that point as fit intellectual companions.

And although I never knew which tales were true and which were not, he
backed some of them up with enough photographic evidence that I could
see he engaged in bizarre (to me) and sometimes dangerous sexual
escapades. Forty years before I had a transgender, non-binary child,
I felt uncomfortable with much of this.

I was boringly monogamous, getting engaged to the only girlfriend I
ever had. Judy liked Uri, but somehow, before my wedding, I decided to
cut him off. I could no longer square his errant morals with the life
I forsaw (not forseeing my non-binary child) for myself.

I regretted this the moment I did it, as he told me he had already
bought me a wedding gift. But I couldn't back down.

Uri and I both continued to spend time in the Boston area. We met
occasionally and were cordial. Then, this past April, shortly after
the COVID-19 shutdown began and I got laid for from work, Uri popped
up on Facebook and asked to connect.

My forty years in the desert of mistreating my friend were over. We
held an online video call to catch each other up on what we were
doing. I began with a full, heartfelt, detailed apology for cutting
him off in our youth. The result was anti-climactic. "Oh, I forgave
you many years ago," Uri answered. "I should have told that that."

"Now," I told him, "I can walk into Yom Kippur services free of this
burden."

Uri displayed all his old charm and brilliance, without odd
transgressive tales, whether of sex or of veracity. He had written a
book in a field I knew something about. He was married and had a grown
child. He belonged to a synagogue.

I will probably reach out again. I'm not sure when. There is little to
tie our lives together now, but his presence in the background of my
life helps me feel whole.

------

October 2, 2020

I'm outside again for today's mindful writing, trying to squeeze the last few days of temperate weather out of our deck's use. Now I wonder whether I was out here enough during the summer. But I shouldn't think of the past. It is better to think of the past than the future, which may omit any enjoyment of calm and beauty.

I have just come away from a call for PFLAG, where I volunteer for the helpline. This was an unusual call because the core of the parents' discomfort and anxiety was political. Their adult gay son is very progressive politically, and they are not. I didn't ask their particular views, but in these contentious times it is not hard to guess that they lie across the great continental divide from their son.

It was actually gratifying to be able to talk to someone whose views differ from mine. We had a good conversation. I focused on making sure the mother understodd just why her son was so insistent--so afraid. I think she understood that discrimination and violence were on his radar. And I pointed her to some political groups focused on the rights of gays. I don't think the contradiction between her love for her son and her support for those wanting to eliminate people like him will persist.

At the same time, I agreed with her on some things and expected that her son is not empathetic. She says he listens only to a small group of like-minded people. I agree that this bubble mentality is a problem. I often see irrational, and frankly counterproductive (in my opinion) viewpoints among progressive people I talk to, especially those in their twenties. But many children, even as adults, have trouble understanding their parents' points of view.
